#
# This file is autogenerated by pip-compile with Python 3.11
# by the following command:
#
#    pip-compile requirements.in
#
aiohttp==3.9.1
    # via black
aiosignal==1.3.1
    # via aiohttp
ansible==9.1.0
    # via -r requirements.in
ansible-compat==4.1.10
    # via
    #   ansible-lint
    #   molecule
ansible-core==2.16.2
    # via
    #   ansible
    #   ansible-compat
    #   ansible-lint
    #   molecule
ansible-lint==6.22.1
    # via -r requirements.in
attrs==23.1.0
    # via
    #   aiohttp
    #   jsonschema
    #   referencing
black==23.12.0
    # via ansible-lint
bracex==2.4
    # via wcmatch
certifi==2023.11.17
    # via requests
cffi==1.16.0
    # via cryptography
charset-normalizer==3.3.2
    # via requests
click==8.1.7
    # via
    #   black
    #   click-help-colors
    #   molecule
click-help-colors==0.9.4
    # via molecule
cryptography==41.0.7
    # via ansible-core
distro==1.8.0
    # via selinux
docker==7.0.0
    # via molecule-docker
enrich==1.2.7
    # via molecule
filelock==3.13.1
    # via ansible-lint
frozenlist==1.4.1
    # via
    #   aiohttp
    #   aiosignal
idna==3.6
    # via
    #   requests
    #   yarl
jinja2==3.1.2
    # via
    #   ansible-core
    #   molecule
    #   molecule-vagrant
jsonschema==4.20.0
    # via
    #   ansible-compat
    #   ansible-lint
    #   molecule
jsonschema-specifications==2023.11.2
    # via jsonschema
markdown-it-py==3.0.0
    # via rich
markupsafe==2.1.3
    # via jinja2
mdurl==0.1.2
    # via markdown-it-py
molecule==6.0.3
    # via
    #   -r requirements.in
    #   molecule-docker
    #   molecule-vagrant
molecule-docker==2.1.0
    # via -r requirements.in
molecule-vagrant==2.0.0
    # via -r requirements.in
multidict==6.0.4
    # via
    #   aiohttp
    #   yarl
mypy-extensions==1.0.0
    # via black
packaging==23.2
    # via
    #   ansible-compat
    #   ansible-core
    #   ansible-lint
    #   black
    #   docker
    #   molecule
pathspec==0.12.1
    # via
    #   ansible-lint
    #   black
    #   yamllint
platformdirs==4.1.0
    # via black
pluggy==1.3.0
    # via molecule
pycparser==2.21
    # via cffi
pygments==2.17.2
    # via rich
python-vagrant==1.0.0
    # via molecule-vagrant
pyyaml==6.0.1
    # via
    #   ansible-compat
    #   ansible-core
    #   ansible-lint
    #   molecule
    #   molecule-vagrant
    #   yamllint
referencing==0.32.0
    # via
    #   jsonschema
    #   jsonschema-specifications
requests==2.31.0
    # via
    #   ansible-lint
    #   docker
    #   molecule-docker
resolvelib==1.0.1
    # via ansible-core
rich==13.7.0
    # via
    #   ansible-lint
    #   enrich
    #   molecule
rpds-py==0.15.2
    # via
    #   jsonschema
    #   referencing
ruamel-yaml==0.18.5
    # via ansible-lint
ruamel-yaml-clib==0.2.8
    # via ruamel-yaml
selinux==0.3.0
    # via
    #   molecule-docker
    #   molecule-vagrant
subprocess-tee==0.4.1
    # via
    #   ansible-compat
    #   ansible-lint
urllib3==2.1.0
    # via
    #   docker
    #   requests
wcmatch==8.5
    # via
    #   ansible-lint
    #   molecule
yamllint==1.33.0
    # via ansible-lint
yarl==1.9.4
    # via aiohttp
